§7. Aurangzeb's relations with the outer Muslim world.
After he was firmly seated on the throne, Aurangzib received a succession of embassies from all the Muhammadan States which had trade relations with India, to congratulate him on his accession.

After the War of Succession, he planned to drown in a shower of gold any scruples which the headmen and theologians of the Holy City might have felt in acknowledging as lawful sovereign the usurper of a loving father's throne. In November, 1659, shortly after his grand coronation, he despatched Sayyid Mir Ibrahim, with six lakhs and sixty thousand Rupees for distribution among the Sayyids, recluses, servitors of the mosques and shrines, and devotees at Mecca and Medina. Thereafter agents of the Sharif used to visit the Delhi Court every year and levy contributions in the name of the Prophet. But at last the Sharif’s greed made Aurangzib turn against him. In the last decade of his reign he wrote to his wazir, “The Sharif of Mecca, having heard of the great wealth of India, sends an envoy every year for making his own gain. The money that I send there is meant for the poor and not for him”.

After Aurangzib had made himself undisputed master of the throne, Shah Abbas II. sent a grand embassy under Budaq Beg, the captain of his musketeers, to congratulate him (1661).

The Persians have been rightly called the Frenchmen of Asia. Their country has been the spring-head of the culture thought and fashion of the entire Islamic world. Persian influence has moulded the poetry of all Muslim lands, and Persian manners and taste have been laboriously, if sometimes clumsily, imitated by all Muhammadan Courts from Cordova and Constantinople to Delhi and Seringapatam. Kings have dreaded the sharpness of a Persian satirist's pen more than their enemies’ swords. The news that a Persian mission was coming caused a flutter in the Mughal Court. Every one from the Emperor down to the meanest guardsman felt that he and his country were on their trial. His manners and conduct would be judged by the masters of social decorum in all Asia, and if he was found wanting in correctness of taste and proper dignity in the least particular, he would be made the laughing-stock of the entire Muslim world.

The presents from the Shah were worth Rs. 4,22,000. On 27 July 1661 the envoy was given leave to depart. On him and his entourage the Emperor conferred gifts worth Rs. 5,35,000. A return embassy charged with a reply to Shah Abbas's letter, was sent under Tarbiyat Khan, the governor of Multan, on 2nd November 1663, with presents worth more than seven lakhs of Rupees, and a letter in which Aurangzib thanked the Shah for his friendly views, but declared in a lofty tone that he needed no man's help as he depended solely on God's favour; his astonishing victories were a proof of God's abounding grace on him. Then he naturally glided into a long and exultant narrative of his triumphs over his brothers. The Mughal envoy had audience of the Shah at Isfahan, but he was very rudely treated and subjected to much humiliation and suffering. The Persian king often uttered threats of invading India in his presence. It was probably at this time that he sent Aurangzib a long letter composed by Mirza Tahir Wahid, vigorously defending the Shia religion, glorifying the Persian royal house, sneering at Aurangzib, and bragging of his own success as a ruler and defender of the true faith!

At last after a year's stay in Persia, Tarbiyat Khan was given conge (1666) and entrusted with a taunting letter for Aurangzib. In it Shah Abbas writes, “I learn that most of the zamindars of India are in rebellion because their ruler is weak, incompetent and without resources. The chief of them is the impious kafit Shiva, who had long lived in such obscurity that none knew of his name; but now, taking advantage of your lack of means and the retreat of your troops, he has made himself visible like the peak of a mountain, seized many forts, slain or captured many of your soldiers, occupied much of that country, plundered and wasted many of your ports, cities and villages, and finally wants to come to grips with you. You style yourself a World-conqueror (Alamgir) while you have only conquered your father and have gained composure of mind by the murder of your brothers. It is beyond your power to repress lawless men. My ancestors have been the refuge of the kings of the world,—witness how we restored to their thrones Humayun and Nazar Muhammad Khan. Now that you, the successor of Humayun, are in distress, it is my royal aim to go personally to India with my multitudinous army, meet you (which has long been my desire), give you every help and extinguish the fire of disorder”. Aurangzib vented his impotent rage on the innocent envoy, accused him of having failed in his duty, denied him audience, and degraded him in rank.

This Shah died in August 1667, and the threatened Persian invasion of India ended in words, though Aurangzib kept a vigilant eye on his Persian frontier to the end of his life. Other embassies to Aurangzib came from Balkh and Bukhara (1661 and again in 1667), Kashghar (1664), Urganj (Khiva), Constantinople (1690), and Abyssinia (1665 and again in 1671). The Delhi Government had also friendly intercourse with several petty chiefs of Arabia and Central Asia, as well as the Turkish governors of Basra.

In the space of less than seven years (1661-67), Aurangzib spent over 21 lakhs of Rupees in receiving and sending out these embassies, besides 11 lakhs given to Abdullah Khan, the ex-King of Kashghar, who took refuge in India in 1668.
