CHAPTER I
ILLNESS OF SHAH JAHAN AND REBELLION OF HIS SONS.
§ 1. Sfaf jahan’s eldest son Dara Shukoh,
‘ On 7th March, 1657, Shah Jahan completed three decades of his reign and began the Sist year. The reign had been as prosperous as it had been Jong. The ‘wealth of Ind’: under this Great Mughal dazzled the eves of foreign visitors, and on gala days ambassadors from Bukhara and Dersia, Turkey and Arabia, as well as travellers from France and aly, gazed with wonder at the Peacock Throne and the Kohinur and other jewels. 2 The white marble edifices which he loved to build were “as costly as they were chaste in design. The nobles of the empire eclipsed the kings of other Jands in wealth and pomp. The bounds - of the “profected empire” had been stretched farther than in any preceding reign. Within the country itself a profound peace reigned. The peasantry were carefully cherished ; harsh and exacting governors were in many cases dismissed on the complaint of the people. Wealth and prosperity increased on all hands. A kind and yet wise master, Shah Jahan had gathered round himself a band of very able officers, and made his Court the centre of the wit and wisdom of the land. But one by one the great ministers and generals who had contribuied io the glory of fhe reign were being removed by the pitiless hand of Death. And, as the gianfs of old passed avay, the Emperor found no worthy successors to
them among the new faces and younger men about him. He had already completed 67 lunar years (@4 Jan. 1657). What would happen after him 9
Shah Jahan had four sons. All of them were past youth, and all had gained experience as governors of provinces and commanders of armies. But there was no brotherly love among them. The _ ill-feeling between Dara and Aurangzib in particular was so bitter and had continued growing  bitlerer for so many years past, that it was the talk of the whole empire, and peace had been maintained between them only by keeping Aurangzib far away from the Court and his eldest brother. Shah Jahan had given clear indications that he wished to leave the crown to Dara, the eldest of his four sons by the same mother. In order fo train him in the administration of the empire and to smooth the transfer of the supreme authority to him, the Emperor had kept Dara by his side for many years past, and allowed him to govern his vicerovalties by deputies. At the same time the Emperor bestowed on him rank and privileges which raised him to an almost royal position. All had to buy or beg Dara’s mediation before they could approach the Emperot.
Dara was just turned of forty-two years. He had taken affer his great-grandfather Akbar. In his thirst for pantheistic philosophy he had studied the Talmud and the New Testament, the writings of the Muslim Sufis, and the Hindu Vedanta. lis aim was to find a meeting-point tor Hinduism and iblam in those universal truths which form the common basis of all true religions and which fanatics are tog apt to ignore in their geal for the mere externals of faith. Alike from the Hindu yogi Lal-dds and the Muslim fogir Sarmad, he had imbibed his eclectic philosophy, and at the feet of both he had sat as an attentive pupil. But he was no apostate from Islam. He had compiled a biography of Muslim saints, and he had been initiated as a disciple of (he Muslim saint Mian

Mir, which no gafir could have been. The saintly Jahanara also speaks of Dara a3 her spiritual preceptor. Dara’s own svords in introducing to the reader his theological works clearly prove that he never discarded the essential dogmas of Islam; he only displayed the eclecticism of the Sufis, a recognized school of Islamic believers. However, his coquetry «vith Hindu philosophy made it impvossible for him, even if he had the inclination, to pose as the champion of orthodox and exclusive Islam, or lo summon all Muslims to his banners by proclaiming a holy war against the people beyond the fold of the faith.
His father’s excessive love did him a dislinct harm. He was always kept af Court and never, except at the third siege ot Qandahar, sent to conducl campaigns or administer proyinees. Thus, he never acquired experience in the arts of war and government ; he never learnt to judge men by the crucial test of danger and difficulty ; and he lost touch with the active army. Hence, he was rendered unfit for that war of uccession which among the Mughals served as a practical test tor fhe survival of the fittest. [lis unrivalled wealth and influence were not likely to develop moderation, self-restraint, or foresight in him, while the fulsome flattery which he received irom all must have aggravated the natural pride and arrogance of an her jo the throne of Delhi. Evidently he was no judge of character. Men of ability and self-respect must have kept away from such a vain and injudicious master. Dara was a loving husband, a doting father, and a devoted son; but as a ruler of men in troubled times he must have been a failure, Long continued prosperity had unnerved his character and made him incapable of planning wisely, daring boldly, and achieving strenuously,—or, if need be, of wrest» ing viclory from the jaws of defeat by desperate effort or heroic endurance. Military organization and tactical combinalion were beyond his power. And he had never learnt by

practice how to guide the vatying tides of a battle with the coolness and judgment of a true general. This novice in the eit of war was destined to meet a practised veteran as his rival for the throne.
§ 2. lilness cf Shab jahan, 1657, and consequent disorder in tfe empttre,
On 6th September, Shah Jahan suddenly fell il of stransury and constipation at Delhi. For one week the royal physicians toiled in vain. The malady went on increasing, The daily darbat was stopped ; the Emperor even ceased to show his face to the public from the balcony. Aflerf a week the doctors ai last got control over the malady. But the improyement in the Emperor’s condition was slight, and so he decided io go to Agra and die there quietly in sight of the tomb of ihe wife he had loved so well. He entered) Agra city on %6lh October.
During Shah Jahan’s illness Dara conslantly watched by his bed-side, and tended and nursed him most carefully, and showed no indecent haste to secure the crown for himself. Early in the course of his illness, when Shah Jahan despaired of recovery, he set himself to prepare for the next world. Calling to his presence some confidential ‘courtiers and the chief officers of ithe State, he made his last will before them and ordered them to obey Dara henceforth as their sovereign. Dara, however, did not assume the crown, but continued to issue orders in his father’s name, while attempting to strengthen his own position. lle removed Mir Jumla, the confidant and partisan of Aurangzib, from the wazir-ship (end of September) and sent orders to Mir Jumla, Mahabat Khan and other imperial officers to return fram the Deccan to the Court with iheir contingents. 48 SHOR’ HISTORY OF AURANGZIB Ica. JH
By the middle of November Shah Jahan had recovered sufficiently to be told of important matters which had hitherto been kept from him. One was that Shuja had crowned himself and was advancing from Bengal. With Shah Jahan’s consent an army, 29,000 strong, was sent against him (30th November) under Sulaiman Shukoh (the eldest son of Dara) and Mirza Rajah Jai Singh. Soon afterwards equally alarming news arrived from Gujrat’ There Murad had crowned himself on Sth December, and formed an alliance with Aurangzib. So, about the end of this month two imperial armies were despatched from Agra into Malwa—one to oppose the advance of Aurangzib from the South and the other to march into Gujrat and oust Murad from the province. The first of these armies was placed under Maharajah Jaswant Singh (of Marwar), who was appointed governor of Malwa vice Shaista Khan recalled to Court. Qasim Khan was induced to aceept the command of the second army by being created governor of Gujrat. Shah Jahan besought these generals to spare the fives of his younger sons, to try at first to send them back to their provinces by fair words if possible, otherwise by a demonstration of force, and not, except in extreme need, to resort fo a deadly battle.
During Shah Jahan’s illness Dara atfirstallowed none but one or two ministers in his confidence to have access to the Emperor. He also waiched the ferries and stopped all letters and messengers going to his brothers in Bengal, Gujrat and the Deccan, and kept their agents at the imperial Court under watch lest they should send any report to their masters. But these precautions only wrought greater mischief, The ; princes and people in the disiant provinces nalurally concluded
from this stoppage of news that Shah Jahan was dead, and all the confusion and disorder of a Mughal succession broke out. Everywhere lawless men began to cause turnults, ihe peasants refused to pay the revenue, the zamindars tried
to rob or conquer their rivals, and the frontiers were violated. The focal authorities were paralysed by uncertainty and anxiety about the future, and law and order suddenly disappeared in many places.
No doubt, letters in Shah jJahan’s hand and seal reached the princes assuring them of his recovery, but they maintained that these were really written by Dara, an expert imitator of Shah Jahan’s handwriting, and that the late Emperor's seal was necessarily in the pogsession of the usurper ! The three younger brothers, therefore, very plausibly asserted in their letters to the Emperor that their loving minds had been unsettled by these alarming rumours, and they were marching on Agra to see their father with their own eves and satisfy themselves as to his real condition.
§ 3. Durad Bakhsh crowns fimself in Guyrat.
Muhammad Murad Bakhsh, the youngest son of Shah Jahan, was the black sheep of the imperial family. He had been iried in Balkh, the Deccan, and Gujrat, and he had failed everywhere. A foolish, pleasure-loving and impetuous prince, his character had not improved with age ; he had nol learnt to apply himself to business or to bridle his passions. Worse sill, he had not the gift of choosing capable agents. But Murad possessed the reckless valour of a soldier. Place him in the field of combat, and the martial spirit of Timur would fire his blood, he would resistlessly force his way to close gtips with the enemy, and, amidst the carnage raging round him, forget every other feeling save the fierce delight of slaughter, But his personal valour was a poor compensation for his lack of generalship.
Knowing the prince’s incapacity, Shah jahan had _ tried to remedy the mischief by sending to him a_ very capable and honest officer named Ali Naqi as his revenue minister

and chief counsellor. Ali Naqi’s pure and vigilant administration raised against him a host of enemies among the flatterers and boon companions of the prince. A conspiracy was soon formed by Murad’s favourite’eunuch against the hated minister. A letter in Ali Naqi’s hand and seal, professing adhesion io the cause of Dara, was forged and given to a courier, who contrived {to get himself arrested by Murad’s road patrol, without betraying its real authorship. Murad was revelling in his pleasure-garden when the intercepted letter was brought to him a litte before dawn. The prince, who had not slept off his night's debauch, burst into wrath and ordered Ali Naqi to be dragged to his presence. Quivering with pent-up wrath, he ran Ali Naqi through with his spear, shouting, “Wretch ! in spite of all my favours you have turned such a traitor !”
Murad was enlisting troops in large numbers and needed money badly. So he sent an eunuch named Shahbaz Khan with 6,000 troopers and war material to levy contribution from the rich port of Surat. The unwalled city was easily occupied and footed. Under the guidance of some Dutch artificers Shahbaz Khan ran mines under the wall of the fort of Surat, and by exploding one ‘of them forced the place to surrender (20th December). Murad thus gained all the guns and accumulated treasures of Surat, besides iaking a forced loan of five /akfis of Rupees from two of the richest merchants.
In the meantime, soon after receiving the news of Shah Jahan’s serious illness, Murad and Aurangzib had opened a confidential correspondence with each other by means of trusty messengers. They also wrote to Shuja inviting his co-operation against Dara, but the long distance prevented their forming any definite or working agreement. Between Murad and Aurangzib, however, a plan of concerted action was soon matured, From the very beginning Murad placed himself undet Aurangzib’s guidance, But he was too impetuous. After his 1658} MURAD’S TREATY WITH AURANGZIB 51
success at Surat, he publicly crowned himself as Emperor under the title of Maruwwaj-ud-din (th December). In letter after letter we find Murad all fire and haste, while Auranggib is cold and hesilating.
Murad proposed that ithe brothers should march at once from the South and attack Dara before he had time to consolidale his power and to win over the capiains of the imperial army posted far and near. Aurangzib pressed him not to take any compromising step or sef up the banner of revolt openly, but to wait, to dissimulate, and to send hollow friendly letters to Dara, till they should know for certain that Shah Jahan was dead. Aurangzib had suggested to Murad that a diversion should be made against Dara by instigating the Persians and Uzgbaks to invade Afghanistan, which was then a province of the Mughal empire. Murad, therefore, wrote to the king of Persia reporting the rumour of Shah Jahan’s death and begging armed aid from him. The fatier wanted fo wait and verify the news.
A solemn treaty for the partilion of the empire on the following terms was drawn up by Aurangzib, sworn to on the Quran, and sent to Murad :
() Murad was to hold the Panjab, Afghanistan, Kashmir and Sindh and reign over them as an independent king. The rest of the Mughal dominions was to belong to Aurangzib.
Gi) One-third ot the prize of war was to belong to Murad and two-thirds to Aurangzib.”
His preparations being now complete, Murad set out from Ahmadabad on 25th February 1658 and effected a junction with Aurangzib’s forces at Dipalpar in Malwa on {4th April.
* These terms are clealy given in Awrangzib’s own letter (Adab-i-Alamartt, p. 78), his officer Aqil Khan Rasi’s history (p, 95), and the Taskivat-us-salatin-us~chagntaia, thus refuting Bernier’s absurd story that Aurangzib promised to give ihe entire empire to Murad while he himself would go lo Mecca as a datvish (Hazratji) after overthrowing the infidel Dara, 59 SHORT HISIORY OF AURANGZIB [cu. Ill
4 4, Aurangszib’s anxieties and policy on the eve of the War of Succession.
From 4th October 1657, when Aurangzib retired from the war with Bijapur, to 23th January 1658, when he began his march towards Hindustan as a claimant to the throne, he passed through a most anxious and critical time Events which he could nof possibly control were moving fast. *
His present position was daily growing more untenable, while the future was ominous, But the difficulties, great and complex, which he overcame raise to the highest pitch our admiration for his coolness, sagacity, power of managing men, and diplomatic skill.
The news had got out that the Emperor had ordered peace to be made and recalled the additional troops sent to the Deccan’, Thus a cruel fate threatened to snatch away from‘ Aurangzib’s grasp the fruits of his long and costly war with Bijapur, just when he was about to taste them. Aurangzib, therefore, determined lo play a game of boldness in order to realize the terms of the treaty before the Bijapuris could recover from their recent defeats or learn of the full extent of the weakness and distraction of the imperial Government.
But this policy of facing round to Bijapur and making military demonstrations in the South had its drawbacks too, The longer Aurangzib delayed in maturing his plans for contesting the throne, proclaiming himself a claimant, and marching on Hindustan, the greater was the time that Dara would gain for recalling the chiet captains from the Decca, winning over officers and men far and near, consolidating his own power, and offectually cotinieracting Aurangzib’s possible designs. If, on the other hand, Aurangzib concentrated his forces, made a public claim to the throne, marched northwards and openly">~ broke with the imperial Government by enlisting {roops,——then he would, no doubt, check Dara in time, he would secure (he {1657 AURANGZIB'S ANXIETIES AND PLANS
Ka

adhesion of ambitious adventurers. But at the same tine all hope of getting Parenda or the promised indemnity would be gone, and his other enemies in the South would raise their heads ; the fruits of the last lwo vears’ warfare in the Deccan would be totally lost to him.
Aurangzib’s letters, preserved in the Adab-~i-Alamgirt, tell the story of how the hope of a speedy setilement with Bijapur daily grew fainter and fainter, how he tried diverse means to get the promised territory and money, how he conceded to Bijapur one by one the hard terms wrung out of it by the treaty,—till at last, in despair of getting anything from Bijapur, he gave up all thought of the South, and turned his undivided attention and resources to the pursuit of his schemes in Northern India.
Leaving Kaliani on 4th October 1657, Aurangsib reached Bidar in five days, This fort was repaired and properly garrisoned and provisioned. On the 18th of the month he resumed his retreat march and arrived at Aurangabad on the 1ith November. As soon as he left Bidar, there was the greatest rejoicing in the Deccani kingdoms; here were the Mughals abandoning their late conquests as untenable | He had sent Mir Jumia to the Parenda district (28th Sept) to get delivery of that fort in terms of the treaty. Bul the hope of getting Parenda and the Bijapur indemnity grew fainter and fainter, in spite of all the efforts of Mir Jumla, and at last that general returned baffled to Aurangabad (1st January 1658).
As early as 28th October Aurangzib had taken a very necessary precaution by sencing a force to seize all the ferries of the Narmada and prevent correspondence between Dara and the imperial officers in the Deccan. But what line of action was he to adopt now ? His followers were looking up to him to declare his policy, but a decision at this stage was most difficult to make and beset with daggers. The news from the imperial Court was conflicting, Shah Jahan’s exact condition
could not be known with certainty, and for many weeks Aurangzib lived in the greatest distraction ; and so did his followers.
Aurangzib had from the first decided not to raise the banner of rebellion before knowing for certain that Shah Jahan was dead. But the quick march of events forced his hand. Dara’s plan with regard to the South’ was now fully unfolded : he had induced the helpless Shah Jahan to remove Murad from the viceroyalty of Gujrat and to transfer the subaf of Berar from Aurangzib to Murad, so as to make the two brothers quarrel. Further, Dara had sent two armies against his two brothers in ihe South (close of December) and recalled Shaista Khan (a strong supporter of Aurangzib) from his province of Malwa to the Court, while Mir Jumla now received an imperial letter of recall from Aurangzib’s side which it would have been flat rebellion to disregard. Similar letters reached Aurangzib’s officers
§ 5. Aurangszib’s preparations for contesting the [frone.
The time for action had at last arrived, if Aurangzib hoped ever to be king or even to live in freedom. His mind was made up early in January 1658, and he took rapid and decisive steps. First, Mir Jumla was atrested by collusion with him, lodged in mock captivity in Daulatabad fort, and all his property and excellent artillery seized by Aurangzib in the name of the State. The prince gave out as the ostensible reason for this act, that Mir Jumla was in secret intrigue with
the two Deccani Sultans against the Emperor! He next wrote .
to Shah Jahan and the new wazir Jafar Khan to the effect that his loving heart had been distracted | by hearing sad rumours about Shah Jahan, and that like a dutiful son he was
going to Agra to see his father in his illness, release him from:
Dara’s control, and thereby save the empire from alarm, confusion and. tumult
©
on
Lory
Letters were written to Qutb Shah pressing him to pay up the balance of his war indemnity, and the Mughal envoy at the Golkonda Court was ordered to behave gently to that Ring, and to induce him to do nothing unfriendly to the Mughal interests during Aurangzib’s proposed absence from the Deccan. Friendly epistles and presents were sent to the Queen Mother (Bari Sahiba) of Bijapur, urging her to expedite the payment of the promised money and to keep the Bijapuris quiet during his absence, Still later, a very tempting offer was made to Adil Shah by Aurangzib, as the price of his friendliness: “Remain loyal and keep your promises... 1 agree that (1) the fort of Parenda and its dependent territory, the Konkan, and the mafal of Wangi, which have been annexed to the empire, together with that portion of the Karnatak which had been granted to the late Adil Shah,—should be left to you as before, and (2) out of your promised indemnity of one &rore of Rupees, thirty lakhs are remitted. Protect this country ; improve its aclministration. Expel Shiva who has sneaked into the possession of some forts of the land. Do you send me at least 10,000 cavalry. I shall grant you all the territorry up to the bank of the Banganga.”
All this time Aurangzib was intriguing actively but in secret with the courtiers of the capital and the high officers in the provinces (especially Malwa). Of all the four sons of Shak Jahan he had the best reputation for capacity and experience, All self-seeking nobles and officers recognized him as the coming man, and hastened to secure their future by doing him friendly turns, or at least by sending him secret assurances of their suppor |
The enlisting of new soldiers had been going on apace. Large quantities of salipetre, sulphur and lead were bought for making munitions, while the gunpowder and fuses in the Deccan forts wete taken away for the advance on Delhi. In this way Aurangsib’s army was swollen fo 30,000 picked
troopers, besides Mir Jumla’s excellent train of cannon served by English and French gunners.
Aurangzib was even stronger in officers than in men and material. During his rule of the Deccan he had gathered round himself a band of very able servants, all attached to him by gratitude and some by personal affection. They did him signal service during the contest tor the throne. Such were Murshid Quli Khan, the dfwan, Shaikh Mir, the warrior and confidential adviser, Agil Khan Razi, the equerry and personal attendant, Qabil Khan, the facile and trusty secretary, Khan~ i-Zaman, the energetic Inspector of Ordnance, Muhammad Tahir, aveteran caplain raised to tHe peerage as Wazir Khan, the faithful envoy Isa Beg (created Mukhlis Khan), the highborn and experienced Shams-ud-din Mukhtar Khan, and above all that jewel of a servant, Mir Jumla, great in war, greater still in counsel. Among his most devoted Hindu followers were Rao Karan of Bikanir, Subh-Karan the Bundela (of Datia), and Rajah Indramani of Dhamdhera.
Before leaving the Deccan Aurangzib took steps to maintain his hold on the country during his absence. Prince Muazzam was left at Aurangabad with two high officers and a strong force to carry on the government,_ while Aurangzib’s harem was placed in the neighbouring fort of Daulatabad.
At last, on Sth February 1658, Aurangzib started from Aurangabad to contest the throne. Burhanpur was reached on the 18th, and here a month’s halt was made in order to complete the organization of his army and other preparations. Leaving Burhanpur on 20th March, he arrested and put in prison his father-in-law Shah Nawaz Khan, who persisted in his loyalty to Shah Jahan (26th March), The Narmada was crossed at Akbarpur, without the least opposition (3rd April), and then while marching northwards to Ujjain, he learnt an the 13th, near Dipalpur (some 96 miles south of Ujjain), that Murad had arrived a few miles west of him. Next day the
two brothers joined their forces near the lake ot Dipalpur, laswant was only one day’s march in front of him. In the evening the princes encamped at the village of Dharmat (14 miles s. 5. w. of Ujjain), on the western bank of the Gambhira, an affluent of the Chambal river. Next day the great war of Mughal Suceession began. BOOK Il.
CHAPTER IV WAR OF SUCCESSION : AURANGZIB TRIUMPHS. § 1. Jaswant at Dhaemat ; his difficulties.
Reaching Ujjain with his army at the end of Pebruary 1658, Jaswant was quite in the dark about Aurangzib’s intentions and movements, so. strictly did that prince watch the roads and ferries of the Narmada river. The first news that he got of Aurangzib was that the prince was already in Matwa and rapidly marching on Ujjain.
In utter perplexity Jaswant advanced fourteen miles south-west of Ujiain and encamped opposite Dharmal, to block the path of the enemy coming up from the south. Here another startling news reached him: Murad had joined Aurangzib (14th April) and the two were within a day’s march of him.
Jaswant had come ta Malwa in the hope that the mere prestige of the imperial banners would send the rebellious princes back to their provinces, and that all that he would have to undertake was a mere demonstration of force. Now, when too late, he realized that his adversaries were in deadly earnest and ready to fight to the bitter end.
Jaswant was severely handicapped by Shah Jahan’s instrucfions to send the two rebellious princes back to their own provinces with as little injury to them as possible, and to fight them only as a last resource. While Aurangzib followed his own judgment only, knew his own mind, Jaswant was hesitating, distracted by the conflict between the instructions from
Agra and the exigencies of the actual military situation in Malwa, and entirely dependent for his own line of action on what his opponents would do.
His army, too, was an ill-Rnit group of discordant elements. The various Rajput clans were often divided from each other by hereditary feuds and quarrels about dignity and precedence. Then, again, there was the standing aloofness between Hindus and Muhammadans. It had been found next to impossible to brigade these creeds together for a campaign under one general, There was no unity of command in the imperial army assembled at Dharmat, because Qasim Khan's orders were to co-operate with Jaswant and not to act as his subordinate. Several of the Muslim officers, moreover, were secretly friendly to Aurangzib ; for we find thatin the ensuing battle twenty-four Rajput chiefs and only one Muhammadan general were killed on the Emperor's side. Qasim Khan and his men kept themselves out of harm’s way in the battle and the full brunt of it fell on the Rajputs,
Finally, Jaswant as a general was no match for Aurangzib his faulty plan and conduct of the battle proves his inexperience and hot-headedness. He chose his ground badly and so cramped his men that the horsemen could not manoauvre freely nor gather momentum for a charge ; he failed to send timely succour io the divisions that needed it most, and, the battle once begun, he lost control over his forces as if he were a mere divisional leader and not the supreme commander of all, Lastly, he made the fatal mistake of despising artillery,
Evidently Jaswant’s plan was to skirt the enemy’s artillery and come to close quarters with their troops, disregarding the gun-fire during the first few minutes of the wild gallop. But when the battle began, the Rajputs were penned within a narrow space with ditches and entrenchments “on their flanks, and subjected to a deadly fire before they could spread out for a charge. Secondly, after they had passed by the enemy’s
artillery and engaged Aurangzib’s troops, the French and English gunners of the prince quickly turned their guns sideways and began fo mow down the Rajputs in their new position. It was truly a contest between swords and gunpowder, and artillery triumphed over cavalry.
§ 2, Battle of Dharma.
The two armies were almost equally matched and numbered a little over 35,000 men each, though Aurangzib’s force was immensely superior in cohesion and artillery.
Two hours after sunrise on the 15th of April, the rival hosts sighted each other. Aurangzib’s army advanced slowly upon the imperialist position, keeping its regular formation, and began to shoot down the Rajputs densely packed in columns without space lo manceuvre freely. The Rajput losses began fo mount up every minute. Then their vanguard, led by Mukund Singh Hada, Ratan Singh Rathor, Dayal Singh Jhala, Arjun Singh Gaur, Sujan Singh Sisodia and others, with their choicest clansmen, galloped forward. Shouting their war-ery of Ram / Ram /“they fell on the enemy like tigers, casting away all plan.” The flood of Rajput charge first burst on Aurangzib’s artillery. The guns and muskets fired at point blank range, woefully thinned their ranks, but so impetuous was their onset that it bore down all opposilion. Murshid Ouli Khan, the Chief of Artillery, was slain after a heroic resistance and his division was shaken; but the guns were not damaged, The artillerymen probably fled before the storm, and returned as soon as it passed away. Victorious over the artillery suard, the assailants fell on the front part of Aurangzib’s vanguard: Here an obstinate hand-to-hand combat raged for some time. The Rajputs, flushed with success, swept onward and pierced into the heart of Aurangzib’s vanguard, This was the most critical moment of the day; if the Rajput charge were not checked, all would be over with Aurangzib,
But this front division of the prince’s army was composed of his most picked troops, 8,000 mail-clad warriors, and their gencrals were reliable men, who, seated on their elephants, kept their ground firmly like hills while the flood of Rajput charge raged round and round them in eddies. Here the most stubborn and decisive fighting of the day took place, and “the ground was dyed crimson with blood like a tulip bed.” The force of Rajput impact was divided and weakened when it struck the dense mass of Aurangzib’s vanguard.
Only a few men from Jaswant’s centre and advanced reserve had moved up to support their brethren thus struggling in front; the Mughal troops under Qasim Khan rendered no assistance. Thus, the charge of Jaswant’s vanguard was not followed up ; Aurangzib’s troops, who had parted before the rushing tide, closed again behind them, and cut off their retreat. By this time the watchful eye of Aurangzib had taken the situation in, his advanced reserve had been pushed up to reinforce the van, and he himself moved forward with the centre to form a wall of support and refuge close behind them. Above all, Shaikh Mir and Saf Shikan Khan with the right and left wings of the centre struck the Rajputs in the waist from the two flanks, while they were engaged with |Aurangzib’s van in front. All the six Rajput chieftains, engaged in the charge were slain. Hopelessly outnumbered now, assailed in front, right, and left, and cut off from their rear, the Rajputs were slaughtered after performing frantic deeds of valour.
Meantime, the action had become general. Recovering from* the shock of Mukund Singh’s charge as soon as the Rajput cavalcade swept on to another point, Aurangzib’s gunners, with their pieces mounted on high ground, concentrated their fire on the enemy’s centre under Jaswant himself,
The imperialists, crowded together on a narrow ground flanked with impassable ditches and swamps, could not manoeuvre freely, and “sacrificed their lives like moths in the

flame of war.” At the sight of the annihilation of their brave vanguard and a triumphant forward movement on the part of Aurangzib, Rai Singh Sisodia from the right flank of Jaswant’s centre, and Sujan Singh Bundela and Amar Singh Chandrawat from his van, left the field with their clansmen and returned home.
Meantime, Murad Bakhsh with his division had fallen on Jaswant’s camp, close ta the field, secured the submission of one of its defenders, Devi Singh Bundela, and driven off the rest. Then advancing into the field itself, Murad fell on the — left wing of the imperial army, and it soon ceased to exisi, after losing its commander iftighar Khan.
§ 3. Flight of Jaswant and fis troops.
Rai Singh’s flight had already uncovered Jaswant’s right flank ; the fall of [ftikhar Khan exposed his left. Meantime his van had almost entirely melted away ; the Musalmans, under Qasim Khan, who had kept aloof from the fighting, prepared to run away as they saw Aurangzib’s host advancing on them. And now Aurangzib from the front, Murad from the left, and Saf Shikan Khan from the right, were converging on Jaswanl fike a tumultuous flood, to envelop his small remnant of clansmen. The Maharajah, who had received two wounds, wanted to drive his horse into the advancing  enemy’s ranks and get slain. But his generals and ministers  sefzec{ his bridle and dragged his horse out of the field, and took the road to Jodhpur. The battle had been already lost, and after the flight of the Rathors there was a general rout. But there was no pursuit ; victor and vanquished alike were worn out by the strife, and there was a rich prize af hand. The entire camp of the two imperial generals—with all their artillery, tents, elephants and treasure, became the victorious princes’ spoil, while their soldiers looted the baggage and equipment of the vanquished army.
But far greater than all these material gains was the moral prestige secured by Aurangzib. Dharmat became the omen of his future success. At one blow he had brought Dara down from a position of immense superiority to one of equality with his own, or even lower. Waverers hesitated no longer ; they now knew beyond a moment’s doubt which of the four brothers was the chosen favourite of Victory.
No sooner had Jaswant and Qasim Khan turned their backs than Aurangzib’s band struck up the notes of victory : Aurangzib Rnelt down on the feld and with folded arms rendered thanks to the Giver of Victory.
On the imperial side nearly six thousand men fell in this battle, and the main portion of the loss was borne by the Rajputs. Every clan of Rajasthan contributed its share to the band of heroes who sacrificed their Jives in their master’s service (swami-dfarma). To Ratan Singh Rathor (the progenitor of the houses of Rutlam, Sailana and Sitamau) a noble stone monument was raised by his descendants on the spot where his corpse was burnt.
§ 4. Aurangzib advances to Agra.
The day after the victory the two princes reached Ujjain and marching thence arrived at Gwalior on @2tst May. It was here learnt that Dara had come to Dholpur with a vast army and seized all the well-known and frequented fords over the Chambal river. His entrenchments frowned on the crossing places ; his artillery crowned the opposite bank ; and everywhere strong parties of his troops were on the alert for the enemy’s atrival. To cross the river with its sleep rocky banks and wide ravine-intersected approaches, in the face of stich oppositon, would have led to a heavy loss of life. So Aurangzib secured the help of a logal gamindar and learnt “that, “at Bhadaoli, 40 miles east of Dholpur, there was an
obscure ford with only knee-deep water, which Dara had omitted to guard.
No time was to be lost. In the very evening after their arrival near Gwalior (ist May), while the main army halted, a strong division under three generals and some artillery made a forced match all night, reached the ford next morning, and crossed safely to the other bank. That day Aurangzib himself set out from Gwalior, covered the interval in two long marches and crossed the river al the same place with the rest of his army (23rd May). “The path was rough, the soldiers underwent much hardship before arriving at the ford ; and on the way nearly 5,000 men died of thirst” The military advantage of the movement was immense. By one stroke he had turned the enemy's position and rendered Dara’s elaborate trenches and battcries useless. The road to Agra now lay open before him. ft is now Dara’s turn to abandon the line of the Chambal and fall back on the capital. He had to leave many of his heavier guns on the river bank, and thus weakened himself in attilery in the next battle, From the Chambal the victors marched north and in three days came in touch with the enemy near Samugarh, about ten miles east of Agra.
§ 5. Dara’s movements after Diarmat.
The news of the defeat at Dharmat reached the imperial Court, then at Baluchpur, ten days affer the battle Dara
in appearance only, being 60,000 troopers in number. But ii was composed of a miscellaneous host of diverse classes and localities, hastily got together, and not properly coardinaied ner trained in concerted action. Moreover, many of its commanders were carpel-knights of the Court, having neither the courage nor the experience of the veterans from the Deccan. Dara had made the fatal mistake of sending
Lore
away his trustiest adherents and ablest lieutenants with Sulaiman Shukoh to oppose Shuja and now felt sore need of such efficient instruments. The foreign Muslim soldiers in the imperial service resentecl Dara’s reliance on the Rajouts and left him to his fate. And he was also hampered by Shah Jahan. Even now the Emperor urged him to avoid war; he still fondly hoped that the quarrel among his sons could be peacefully ended by diplomatic messages.
On 18th May, Dara left with his troops for the bank ot the Chambal, after a most pathetic leave-taking from his aged father in the Diwan-i-am of Agra fort He reached Dholpur on the 28nd of the month, and seized all the fords over the Chambal in the neighbourhood. His aim was to retard Aurangzib’s advance without precipitatine a bate and thus gain time for Sulaiman Shukoh’s army to join him. But he soon learnt to his consternation that Aurangzib had crossed the river forly miles east of Dholpur, on the 23rd. So, he fell back towards Agra and encamped outside that city near Samugarh, where Aurangzib arrived on the @8th.
That day, Daca on hearing of Aurangzib’s approach, drew up his troops and rode out as if to fight. But after sighting the enemy he halted, waiting to see what his tivals would do. At sunset he returned to his camp. It was a mast unwise step; Aurangzib was numerically inferior and his {roops were worn out by a ten mile march in the sun over a waterless dusty plain, while Dara’s army was fresh. Dara’s soldiers and their horses and elephants were prostrated by the extreme heat in which they stood hour after hour doing nothing, while the prudent Aurangzib rested his men all thal evening anc night for the morrow’s contest.
§ 6. Battle of Samugach, 20t8 May, 1638.
Next morning, 29th. May, Dara marshalled his ranks_on,a wide plain two miles in front of his camp. His forces

66 SHOR HISTORY OF AURANGZIB leu. IV
numbered about 30,000. Its backbone was composed of the Rajput contingent and Dara’s own retainers, all devoted to his interests. But nearly half of his army belonged to the Emperor’s. service, and these men could not be relied on ; several of their chiefs, notably [Khalilullah Khan had been corrupted by Aurangzib. All the artillery of Dara was drawn up in one row along his entire front ; behind it stood his foot musketeers, next the elephants, and last of ail dense masses of cavalry. Dara’s artillery was less mobile and more inefficiently served than Aurangzib’s, und his horses and transport animals were out of condition. -%
In opposition to this host stood Aurangzib’s hard-bitten troops, seasoned veterans on seasoned horses, and his excellent train of field-pieces handled by the European gunners of Mir Jumla and well supplied with munitions. There was absolute unity of command in his army, and all the officers had been taught to obey without hesitation or question that master will.
The battle joined about noon. Dara al once took up the offensive and discharged all his artillery, making a fearful noise but doing little damage to the enemy at thal long range ; Aurangzib wisely reserved his powder anct shot.
An hour passed in this kind of cannonade, and then Dara ordered a charge. His left wing was led by Rustam Khan. Filing out through the spaces between his guns, it formed a mass and attacked the opposing artillery with flashing blades and wild battle-cries. Aurangzib’s chief of artillery, Saf Shikan Khan, and the musketeers behind his guns stood their ground well and received the charge with one deadly volley from the guns and a shower of bullets, arrows, and javelins. The flood of onset could not reach and overwhelm the guns ; its speed slackened as the cannon balls ploughed up ils ranks. So Rustam Khan swerved to his right hand in search of an easier prey, and galloped towatds Aurangzib's van,
leaving a cloud of dust behind. But Bahadur Khan wrth the right flank of Aurangzib’s centre had hurried up to the front into the gap belween the van and the aitillery, and barred the path of Rustam Khan. A close hand to hand combat now ensued; Bahadur Khan fell down wounded, and his division seemed at the point of being touted, when [slam Khan came to its aid from the right wing and Shaikh Mir with the advanced reserve. It was now the turn of Rustam Khan to be outnumbered and borne down. Mortally wounded in his arm, with a dozen other desperate men he hewed his way to the centre of the enemy’s ranks and there fell amidst a heap of the slain. The small remnant of Dara’s left wing now fled back under Sipihr Shukoh.
At the same time a more terrible fight was being waged on Aurangzib’s feft. There the Rajputs of the imperial vanguard under Chhatra Sal Hada slipped through the interval between Zulfiqar’s artillery and Murad’s division and fell upon that prince with fierce vigour, thus driving a wedge which separated Murad from Aurangzib’s army. Rajah Ram Singh Rathor, wearing the gay yellow robe of Alf and with a string of priceless pearls tied to his turban, fel! on Murad’s elephant, crying out in derision, “Yow want to wrest the throne from Dara !” Shouting to the driver to make the elephant kneel down if he valued his life, the Rajah flung his spear at Murad, but it missed the aim, and the prince shot him dead with an arrow. Other Rajputs fell as they swarmed round Murad’s elephant, and with their robes “made the ground look yellow like a field of saffron!” The Rajput horsemen could not reach the prince on his lofty elephant ; but Murad received three wounds in his face ; his driver was killed, and the fawde of his elephant bristled with arrows like ihe back of a porcupine ; he was borne backwards by this onslaught.
The victorious Rajputs pressed on to the centre and fell on
Auranszib, who was hastening to the aid of Murad on hearing of the disaster on his left. The clash between these two powerful forces was terrible. The Rajputs forced their way to Aurangzib himself, but that prince’s guards offered an opposition equally heroic, and being themselves fresh they prevailed ovet the Rajputs who were worn out and thinned in number by the struggle with Murad. Vet lhe Rajputs fought on against overwhelming odds “in utter contempt of fife.” But one by one all their leaders fell—Chhatra Sal Hada, Ram Singh Rathor, Bhim Singh Gaur and Shivatam Gaur. But the remnant only made a more frantic struggle, “like :avening dogs,” as a European eve-witness describes the scene. Rajah Rup Singh Rathor in reckless audacity jumped down from his horse, with his drawn blade heweda way to the elephant of Aurangzib, and fried to cut the girths of the fawda in the haope of hurling the prince down fo the ground. He slashed the beast’s leg, but was himself cut to pieces by thebody-guard. The rest of the Rajputs perished. Thus both the lefl and right wines of Dara had been annihilated by this time.
§ 7. Dara’s own movements at Samugach ; the end,
At the very beginning of the battle, as soon as Rustam Khan and Chhatra Sal had charged with his left wing and van, Dara quitted his position in the centre, rode through his “artillery, and went towards Aurangsib’s right wing in order to support Rustam Khan. No more fala! mistake could have been committed. Dara could no longer survey the whole field and control his troops as their supreme leader 3 and at onee everything fell inte confusion. Secondly, by advancing in front of his artillery he obstructed its fire, while Aurangzib’s guns continued to mow down his ranks without any chance of reply, This mistake ruined Dara more than all other causes put jogether. Dara now turned to the right in order to avoid the
enemy’s artillery in front of him, and fell upon Shaikh Mir’s division.
Just then Atrangzib was left without any guards. [f Dara could now have forced his way to his rival’s side, the victory would have been his. “But he made a short halt, owing to the difficulties of the ground and to the fatigue that overcame him.” His force lost its growing momentum, and the vigour of its onslaught greatly slackened, and the golden chance was lost for ever. For, in the meantime Aurangzib had dressed his ranks and made new dispositions, and Dara was soon afterwards called upon to abandon his forward movement straight on his rival’s clephant and to turn aside towards his own right wing in order to back the troops of Chhatra Sal. Thus Dara made a long movement across his entire front from the extreme left fo near the extreme right. The friehtful heat struck down his men and horses during this unprofitable manceuvre, while the artillery stationed in the enemy’s front fired volleys straight into his left flank. The men with him were exhausted by this long and toilsome march over loose burning sand, amidst suffocaling dust, and under a blazing sun which made their armour blister the skin, while not a drop of water could be had to quench their thirst.
Meantime, Aurangzib’s vanguard, in obedience to his rigid discipline, had kept its proper position. But now seeing Dara’s two wings and van overthrown and his centre in disorder and out of its proper place, Prince Muhammad Sultan, at the head of his father’s van, sprang forward to attack Dara. At the same time Aurangsib’s victorious right wing wheeled round to envelop Dara’s division, while the batteries from the right and left alike assailed it, This was really the end of the fight. Dara had learnt of the death of his best generals, and now Aurangzib’s troops, “like the waves of the sea, approached him with countless guns in front of them,” Their heavy and well-directed fire mowed down the troops’ still around him every 70 SHORE HISTORY OF AURANGZIB leu. IV
minute. Dara’s own elephant now became “a target for the enemy's balls,” which began to carry off his personal attendants. The wretched prince had no help but to vet down irom this elephant and fake horse. At once all was over with him. His remaining troops all over the field, find ing his fawda empty, concluded that their master had fallen. Already they were half dead with fatigue and thirst, and now a desolating hot wind sprane up and struck Dara’s fainting troops in the face. Many of them died of thirst, without strength to use their arms. What still remained of the imperial army had been only waiting for a decent pretext for flight, and the sudden disappearance of Dara from the back of his elephant gave them the wished for opportunity. At once the whole army broke and fled in the utmost disorder. Dara stood almost alone, deserted by all save a few hereditary followers. They took him out of the field to Agra.
The last trace of resistance now vanished ; bul there was no pursuit. Nor was any pursuit needed, for no victory could be more complete. On the side of the vanquished ten thousand men had fallen, besides horses and transport animals beyond count. Among the slain imperial commanders of high rank, nine Rajputs and nineteen Muslims are mentioned by name.
Bravest among so many brave men was Rao Chhatra Sal Hada, the chieftain of Bundi and the heto of fifty-two fights, “With his Hadas clad in their saffron robes, the ensigns of aeath or viclory, the Bundi prince formed the vanguard of Dara. Cheering on his men, he mounted his elephant, but
* That Dara dismounted from his elephant at a time of extreme danger, when he had lost all hope of victory, is agsetled by 4. M. (108, Aqil (43), Mastm (638), and Kambu (15a) These contemporary and first-rate authorities refute the bazar gossip teproduced by Manucci and Bernier that Dara changed his eluphant for a horse at the treacherous advice of Khalilullah Khan at a time when he had almost compleiely defeated Aurangzib, and thal this act on the part of Dara turned his assmed victory into a rout. (Storiz, 1. 931-989 ; Bernier, 53-54, also Ishyratdas, 946.95a,) 1658} DARA’S FLIGHT FROM AGR\ 71
whilst encouraging them by his voice and example, a cannonball hitting his elephant, the animal turned and fled. Chhatra Sal leaped from his back and called for his steed, exclaiming “My elephant may turn his back on the enemy, but never shall his master.” Mounting his horse, and forming his men into a dense mass, he led them tothe charge against Prince Murad whom he singled out, and had his lance balanced for the issue, when a ball pierced his forehead.” In the two battles of Dharmat and Samugarh no less than twelve princes of the blood, together with the head of every Hada clan, gave up their lives.
The most renowned victim of the day, however, was Rustam Khan, surnamed Firuz Jang, the hero of the Uzbalk and Persian wars.
The army of Aurangzib lost only one chief of the first rank, Azam Khan, who died of the excessive heat,
§ 8. Events at Agra and captivity of Shah Jofian, June 1658.
From the fatal field of Samugarh, Data reached Agra with a few attendants at about 9 o’clock at night, and shut himself up in his house in the city. There was universal alarm and lamentation in the royal family, . Shah Jahan sent word to Data to come to the fort and see him ; but Dara was utterly broken down in body and spirit, and declined saying, “I cannot show my face to your Majesty in my present wretched plight. Permit me to go away with your farewell blessing on the long journey that is before me.”
The miserable prince, with his wife children and a dozen servants, set off from Agra towards Delhi at3, o'clock inthe morning. Mules laden” with gold coins from the palace treasury were sent with him by order of Shah Jahan, and he took away as mtich of his own jewels and cash as he could transport in that hurry. For the next two days small groups of his followers
began to join him on the way, so that his force was raised to 5,000 men by the time he reached Delhi.
After the battle of Samugarh, Aurangzib went to Murad, and congratulated him, saying that the victory was due entirely io his younger brother’s heroism and that Murad’s reign would date from that day. He even nursed the wounded Murad affectionately.
In two marches from the  battle-field the victors arrived in the garden of Nur Manzil or Dhara outside Agra ({st lune). Here they stayed for ten days. Every day large numbers of coutliers, nobles and officers deserted the imperial side and joined them, and so did the former officers of Dara.
The day after Samugarh, Aurangzib wrote to Shah Jahan directly, excusing his late actions as forced upon him by his enemies, On reaching Nur Manzil he received a reply in Shah Jahan’s own hand, inviting him to an interview. This, after some hesitation, Aurangzib declined to do, at the advice of some of his friends (especially Shaista Khan and Khalilullal) who told him that Shah Jahan had formed a plot to get Aurangzib murdered by his Tartar guard-women as soon as he would enter Agra fort.
The mask was at last thrown away, and on the Sth of June the prince began the siege of Agra fort, after sending his eldest son Muhammad Sultan to occupy Agra city (rd June) and maintain order there. Shah Jahan had shut the gates of Agra fort, prepared to stand a siege there. It was one of the strangest forts of that age, and Aurangzib’s artillery was quite ineffective on its defences, Success by breaching and assault was therefore out of the question. A regular investment would have detained the victorious broffiers there for months and even years and thus given Dara time fo raise a new army,
So, Aurangzib sent his men to make a sudden tush and seize the outside of the water gate (ééxird of the fort which opens on the Jamuna. Thus the water-supply of the garrison
was cut off and they began to suffer the horrors of thirst in midsummer. The few old and long disused wells within the forl yielded only a bitter water unfit for drinking. At this, many of the Emperor's officers, pampered idlers of the Court, slipped out of the fort.
For three days Shah Jahan held out under these conditions. He had made a pathetic personal appeal to Aurangzib entreating him not to kill a living father by thirst, but to thal jetter Aurangzib had replied, “It is your own doing.” Then, amidst raging thirst, with only despair and treason around him, the aged Emperor decided to yield. On 8th June he opened the gates of the fort to Aurangzib’s officers and became a prisoner within the harem of the palace, being confined fo the quarters behind the Hall of Public Audience. He was deprived of all power; a strong force was posted in and around the fort to prevent rescue, and careful watch was kept on his eunuchs lest they should carry letiers from him oulside. The vast treasures of Agra fort—the accumulations of three generations of prosperous rulers of India, passed into Aurangzib’s possession.
On 10th June Princess Jahanara visited Awurangzib to try the effect of her personal influence and sisterly persuasion. She proposed, in Shah Jahan’s name, a partition of the empire among the four brothers. Aurangzib naturally declined.
§ 9. Murad Bakfsh's captivity and death.
~On {3th June Aurangzib set out .from.Agra city towards Delhi in pursuit of Dara. But on the way, at Mathura, he had to halt because an alarming situation had arisen on account of Murad’s jealous and wilful conduct. This prince’s courtiers were ielling him how power was daily slipping out of his grasp and Aurangzib was becoming all in all. He was keen on reigning as king, but Aurangzib seemed to be
putting off the fulfilment of that desire to a more and more distant future. Therefore, Murad must assert himself, if he was not to be made a cat's paw and then thrown away by Aurangzib.
Led on by such counsellors, Murad began to act openly in opposition to Aurangzib: he increased his army, seduced from Aurangzib’s side many of the recently joined imperial troops by the promise of higher pay and = greater licence, and conferred titles. Lastly he gave up visiting Aurangzib a3 beneath his dignity. Thus, an open opposition to Aurangzib was set up in the allied camp.
The situation was very critical, But Aurangzib’s plan was quickly formed and skilfully carried out. He _ first luled Murad’s suspicion to sleep by presenting him with 90 lakhs of Rupees and 953 horses, and invited him to a feast for celebrating his complete recovery from his wounds and for maturing a plan of campaign against the fugitive Dara. Lastly, Aurangzib heavily bribed and won over to his side Murad’s favourite body-servant Nur-ud-cdin Khawas, who induced Murad to accept his brother’s invitation and enter Aurangzib’s camp when returning from a hant (25th June).
Murad was cordially received by Aurangzib, well fed, plied with wine, and when asleep deprived of his arms and made a prisoner. At midnight the captive was sent in a covered ladies’ Aawda, under a strong cavalry escort to Salimgarh and thence to the State-prison of Gwalior. This “excellent stratagem” had been carried out so smoothly that Murad’s followers did not hear of his fate Hill it was too lale. Next morning his leaderless soldiery were taken into Aurangzib’s service, and even his devoted officers had no course left open to them but to submit to this new master. The entire establishment and property of Murad passed into Aurangzib’s possession,
Murad lived for three years in the fortress of Gwalior, but an attempt at escape which his friends oulside had planned
mn
and which narrowly missed success through Murad’s own thoughtlessness, cetermined Aurangzib to get rid of him. Ai the Emperor’s instigation, the second son of Ali Nagi demanded retaliation in blood from Murad for the murder of his father at Ahmadabad in 1657, This, under the Islamic law, the judges were bound to srant. So, on 4th December, 166!, the luckless aspirant to the throne of Delhi was beheaded by two slaves in the prison cell of Gwalior and his corpse was buried within thal fort. CHAPTER W WAR OF SUCCESSION ; END OF DARA AND SHUJA
§$ 1. Pursuit of Dara after Samugarh.
Dara reached Delhi on Sth June 1658 and tried to raise
and equip a new army by appropriating the Government property in the capital. But a week afterwards he left Delhi for Lahor, on learning that the fall of Agra fort had set Aurangzib free fo pursue him. \The Panjab was strongly attached to Dara; the province had long been his viceroyalty and was now held by his faithful deputy Sayyid Ghairat Khan. Leaving Delhi at the head of 10,000 men, Dara reached Lahor on 3rd July, and spent a month and a half there in completing his war preparations. Seizing the imperial treasure there, he assembled an army of 20,000 men and sent off strong detachments to guard the ferries over the Satlej at Talwan and Rupar,
In the meantime, Aurangzib had deputed Khan-i-Dauran to wrest Allahabad from Datra’s men and Bahadur Khan to take up the pursuit of Dara, and then pushed on to Delhi, Sth July. At this capital he stayed three weeks, constructing a new administration in the place of the old one, and finally he crowned himself Emperor under the title of dlamgir Ghazi on Qist July. Khalilullah Khan was appointed governor of the Panjab and sent to reinforce the pursuit of Dara.
In the night of Sth August, Bahadur Khan crossed the Satie} by surprise at Rupar, and Dara’s generals fell back from that river to Govindwal on the Bias. But when Aurangzib from Delhi reached the Satlej, Dara fled from Lahor (18th August) fo Multan, with his family and treasure,
by boat. Once more Dara’s genius quailed before that of Aurangzib ; he despaired of success, and his despair infected his troops.
Aurangzib’s forces set off from Lahor on 30th August at the heels of Dara, and that Emperor himself joined the pursuers on 17th September. But Dara again Hed, from Multan (13th September) to Sakkar (13th October), From the environs of Multan, Aurangzib turned back (30th Sept) for Delhi to meet Shuja’s invasion, but the chase of Dara was relentlessly continued by Saf Shikan Khan and Shaikh Mir at the head of two strong columns, totalling 15,000 men, following the two banks of the Indus.
At Sakkar the imperialists learnt (3rd October) that Dara had left much of his property and his big guns in the fort of Bhakkar in charge of his eunuch Basant, with many European gunners under Nicholas Manucci, and himself fled towards Schwan, deserted by all his troops except 3,000 men. Even the trusty Daud Khan was at last driven to leave his unjustly suspicious master. At Sehwan the imperialists came up with Dara by forced marches (Gist Oct.) and occupied both banks of the Indus, hoping to intercept him. But they were very weak in boats, and Dara who was stronger in that arm dashed through the broad river (Qnd Nov.) in safely and reached Tatta (13th Nov). The imperialisis made forced marches after him to Tatta (1Sth), but learnt that Dara had fled further south to Badin (@4th) and was marching over the gulf of Cutch towards Gujrat.
The pursuers were now recalled to Courf; the pursuit which they had carried on with such unflagging vigour and amazing endurance for three months since Dara leff Lahor, had missed success, when almost within their grasp, solely through their tack of boats. SHORL HISTORY OF AURANGZIS [cu Vv
mt iz)
§ 2. Dara in Rajputana ; battle of Deora.
After leaving Badin, 53 miles east of Tatta, Data crossed the Rann or salt lagoon (end of November), — suffering unspeakable hardship through lack of water. Arrived at Bhuj, the capital of the island of Cutch, he was welcomed and given every help by the Rajah, as also by the Jam of Nawanagar in WNathiawad. Thus he arrived at Ahmadabad at the head of 3,000 men. Here Shah Nawaz Khan, the new governor of the province, joined him and opened the royal ireasury to him (th January, 1659), Dara now raised his army fo 22,000 men, brought away the artillery of Surat, and learning that Shuja had advanced beyond Allahabad to atlack Aurangzib, he made a dash towards Asra at the same time. On the way he received an invitation to Ajmir from Jaswant Singh, who promised to join him with the Rathors and other Rajouts.
But, in the meantime, Aurangzib afler crushing Shuja al Khajwa (Sth Jan), bad won over Jaswant with the help of Mirza Rajah Jai Singh by means of mingled threats of invasion and hopes of promotion. Dara had no help but to fight, for Aurangzib had atrived near him. He wisely changed his plan. Instead of fighting a pitched battle in an open plain, he decided to hold the pass of Deorai, four miles south of Ajmir, in the narrow breadth of which a small host can keep a superior foree of assailants back. His two flanks were protected by the hills of Bithli and Gohla; while behind him lay the rich city of Ajmir, whence he could easily draw his stpplies. He ran a low wall south of his position, from hill to hill across the valley, with trenches in front and redoubis at different points.
Aurangzib approached this position from the south, and began a bombardment of it from the sunset of 12th March, 1659, to the night following the 13th. Dara’s artillery and
muskets trom their high and shellered position showered death on Aurangzib’s unprotected gunners and infantry, while the latter could not fire back with effect. The enemy’s trenches were impregnable. So, on the 14th Auranezib held a council of war and adopted a new plan of atlack, wiz, to make a concentrated attack in overwhelming strength on the enemy's left wing under Shah Nawaz Khan, while their right wine was to be kept in play by the imperial division opposite ff; but the success of the scheme was to depend not on this frontal attack but on a secret movement to turn the enemy’s left rear (the Gokla hill), which was to be scaled from behind by Rajah Rajrup of the Jammu hilis and his clansmen expert in mountaineering, who had discovered a path to its top.
Towards the evening of the {4th, the imperial army massed in front of the enemy’s left delivered their assault upon Shah Nawaz Khan's trenches. Their artillery reapened fire with great rapidity and prevented the other divisions of Dara’s army from leaving their {renches and marching across the front to aid their hard-pressed brethren on the left. The hardest fight raged in this part of the field. Dara’s men obstinately defended their lines. Wave after wave of the imperialists swarmed up fo the charge; and at last they pushed back all the enemy out of the plain and won the ground to the edge of the trenches.
By this time Rajrup’s men had toiled up the back of the Gokla hill, while the enemy wete absorbed in the severe contest in their front. They planted their banners on the top and raised a shout Dara’s left wing was seized with cespair at their rear being, thus turned, but many of the men. still fought with courage. To overcome this last opposition, Shaikh Mir drove his elephant forward, but was killed by a bullet At last, these trenches were stormed. Shah Nawaz Khan, while cheering his men even after all was over, was blown away by a cannon-ball. The rank and file broke and fled avway tnder the cover of darkness.
True, only one of the four entrenchments had so far been carried ; but it was enough: Dara’s lines had been fatally pierced and rendered untenable by the turning of the Gokla hill. Accompanied by his son Sipihr Shukoh and only a dozen al his men, Dara fled from the field in headlong haste towards Gujrat. The country round Ajmir became a wild scene of plunder ; thousands of Rajputs had assembled in the neighbourhood at the call of Jaswant and were hovering round like vuitures for their expected prey. They now looted the property and transport animals of the vanquished army.
§ 3. Flight and capture of Dara.
During the battle of Deorai, Dara’s harem and treasure had been left on the bank of the Anasagar lake (at Ajmir), on elephanis, camels and mutes, in charge of the faithful eunuch Khwajah Maqul and an escort of troops, ready for flight. These fled from the place in the night of the 14th and joined Dara near Mairta in the afternoon of the 15th. But Aurangzib had already detached a strong force under Jai Singh and Bahadur Khan in pursuit of them, and therefore Dara could not resi anywhere bul had to resume his march with the same haste as before. Only 2,000 troopers accompanied him when he left Mairta. Covering thirty miles or even more a day in their rush to Gujrai, they underwent extreme misery from heat and dust and want of fents and transport animals. Their few horses and camels perished from heat and overwork.
Everywhere Dara found Aurangzib’s letters had preceded him and the local officers were ready jo seize him. His last hope was gone when his messenger returned from Ahmadabad with the dismal news that he would be resisted if he tried to enter that city, At this destruction of their last hope of refuge the pariy was “overwhelmed with confusion and dismay, ... anc the shrieks of the females drew tears from every eve ,
Dr. Bernier who was attending on Dara’s sick wife, gives a heartrending picture of their misery and suffering at this time. “Reduced to the poorest and sorriest dress, ... accompanied by one horse, one bullock-cart, five camels for his ladies, and a few other camels for transport, his retinue shrunk to a few men,” the chosen heir to the richest throne in Asia crossed the terrible Rann once again, and reached the southern coast of Sindh (beginning of May).
Here, too, he found his path fo lower Sindh closed by the forethought of Aurangzib, who had sent down Khalilullah Khan from Lahor to Bhakkar. Aurangzib’s local officers and Jai Singh's advanced detachments were converging on their prey from north, east and south-east. Only one path of escape remained open: Dara turned to the north-west, crossed the Indus and entered Siwisian, intending to flee to Persia by way of Qandahar.
In the meantime Jai Singh from Ajmir had been pushing on behind Dara, covering {6 fo 920 miles a day, in spite of scarcity of water, want of fodder, and exhaustion of his horses and transport animals. Following Dara’s tracks he crossed the lesser and the greater Rann and the island of Cutch, suffering frightful privations on the way. “At places grain sold at a seer per Rupee, at others no food at all could be procured.” But he pursued his course with grim tenacity ancl reached the Indus on the border of Siwistan on I[1th June 1659, though more than three-fourths of his troop horses perished during the journey. Then, learning that Dara had gone out of Mughal India, he began his return march to Hindustan up the Indus.
But Dara’s family were utterly opposed tothe idea of migrating to Persia. His beloved wife, Nadira Banu, was seriously ill and the privations of a journey through the desolate Bolan Pass and the inhospitable region of Qandahar would have killed her. Dara, therefore, changed his mind and looked about for a chieftain in that neighbourhod who would
ay
3°

give him a safe shelter and the services of his clansmen. Such a friend he hoped fo find in Malik Jiwan, the samindar of Dadar, a place nine miles east of the Indian end of the Bolan Pass, Years ago this Afghan chief hac been sentenced by Shah Jahan to be trampled to death by an elephant. Dara, fhen at the height of his father’s favour, hacl successfully begged the condemned man’s life and liberty from the Emperor. Ile now looked tor Jiwan’s gratitude, and reached Dadar, where the chief took him to his house, showing him every respect and care (probably 6th June).
On the way to Dadar, Nadira Banu succumbed to hardship and want of medicine and rest. Dara was frantic with gtief ai losing his life’s companion. “The world grew dark in his eyes. He was utterly bewildered. His judgment and prudence were entircly gone.’ He sent her corpse to Lahor for burial in the graveyard of the saint Mian Mir (his own spiritual guide), under escort of all the 70 troopers. still left at his side and his most devoted officer, Gul Muhammad, He offered his companions a free choice belween  relurning to their homes and accompanying him to Persia. Thus it happened that nota single devoted follower now remained with Dara, and he became utterly helpless and dependent upon his host’s fidelity.
(_ Cupidity overcame the Afghan’s gratitude and fidelity to plighted word. He treacherously arresled Dara and_ his younger son and two daughters (th June) and delivered them to Bahadur Khan. \
§ 4. Humtliation and murder of Dara.
When the prisoners arrived al Delhi they were paraded through the streets of the capital with disgrace (29th August). Dara was seated in an tncovered fawda on the back of a
small female elephant covered with dirt. By his side was Py we tA

his second son, Sipthr Shukoh, a Jad of tourteen; and behind them with a naked sword sat their ferocious gaoler, the slave Nazar Beg. The heir to the tichest throne in the world was now clad in a travel-tainted dress of the coarsest cloth, with a dark dingy-coloured turban, such as only the poorest wear, on his head, and no necklace or jewel adorning his peison. His feet were chained, though his hands were free. Exposed to the full blaze of an August sun, he was faken in this guise through the scenes of his former glory anc splendour. In the bitterness of disgrace he did not raise his head, nor cast his glance on any side, but sat “like a erushed twig.”
The pity of the citizens swept every other feeling away, The crowd assembled was immense, and everywhere, Bernier observed, the people were «weeping and lamenting the fate of Dara.
That evening Aurangzib held a private consultation with his ministers about Dara’s fate. Danishmand Khan (Bernier’s patron) pleaded for his life, but Shaista Khan, Muhammad Amin Khan, Bahadur Khan, and the Princess Raushanara from the harem demanded his death for the good of Church and State. The pliant theologians in the Emperor’s pay signed a decree stating that Dara deserved death on the ground of his deviation from Islam.
A riot by the citizens of Delhi against the traitor Malik liwan (recently created a hazari with the litle of Bakhtiyar Khan), when on his way to the Court, on the 30th, precipitated the end of Dara. That verg night Nazar Beg and some other slaves visited Dara’s prison in Khawaspura, tore away Sipihr Shukoh from his father’s arms and hacked Dara to . pieces. By Aurangzib’s order the corpse was_placed_on an elephant, paraded through the streets of the cify a second time, and then buried in a vault under the dome of the tomb of Humayun.
§ 5. End of Sulaiman Shukoh.
We shall now trace the fate of Dara’s eldest son, Sulaiman Shukoh. After his victory over Shuja near Benares, he had purstied his defeated uncle through Bihar to Mungir, when early in May 1658, he received asummons from his father to return quickly to his side as Aurangzib had triumphed at Dharmat. So, he hurriedly patchecl up a peace with Shuja and set out on his return. On 2nd June, when 105 miles west of Allahahad, he received news of his father’s ruin at Samugarh. His soldiers were distracted; Jai Singh and Dilir Khan, his greatest generals, as well as all the other imperial officers feft him for Aurangzib. Only 6,000 men, fess than one-third of Sulaiman’s army, accompanied him in his retreat to Allahabad (4th June), where he wasted a precious week in distraction not knowing what lo do with his cumbrous and costly furniture and plate and vast harem of women. At last, at the advice of his chief followers the Sayyids of Barha, he decided to make a wide loop round Delhi, march by the northern side of the Ganges, through their home the Middle Doab, and then cross the rivers at the foot of the hills, in order to reach his father in the Panjab withoul fear of interception.
Sulaiman rapidly moved by way of Nagina to Chandi, on the bank of the Ganges opposite to Haraiwar. Numbers of soldiers deserted him daily, and strong enemy forces pushed up from Delhi barred his path everywhere in the south, east and west. So, Sulaiman fled to the Srinagar hills for an asylum, his Sayyid followers of Barha refusing fo accompany him there. Prithwi Singh, the Rajah of Srinagar (in Garhwal} admitted him on condition of his being accompanied by his family and seventeen servanis only but none of his soldiers. The Rajah was all kindness and attention to his princely guest in distress, and Sulaiman enjoyed peace in his rude but safe refuge for a year,
Hi
But when Aurangzib was at last triumphant over all isis brothers, he turned against Sulaiman. On 27th July 1659 be sent Rajah Rajrup to secure the surrender of Sulaiman from the Rajah of Srinagar ; but for a year anda half his efforts were futile. Aurangzib next employed Jai Singh, who wrote to Prithwi Singh not to destroy his kingdom by disobeying the Emperor’s order. The Garhwal Rajah was old and refused to undertake the sin and shame of betraying an accepted refugee. But his son and heir, Medini Singh, was more worldly-minded ; the hope of rewards from Delhi conquered his scruples. There was also the fear of losing his kingdom, as Aurangzib was instigating the neighbouring and rival hill-Rajahs to invade and annex Garhwal. On hearing of this decision of his host, Sulaiman tried to escape over the snow to Ladak, but was pursued, captured wounded, delivered to Aurangzib’s agent, and brought to Delhi on @nd January, 1661.
On Sth January the prisoner was placed before his dread uncle in the Hall of Private Audience of the Delhi palace. His youth, extreme beauly, martial fame, and present misery deeply interested the courtiers and even the ladies of the imperial harem in his fate. Aurangzib spoke to him with apparent kindness, “Be comforted ; no harm shall befall you. You shall be treated with tenderness.” The prince made the sa/am or sign of grateful acknowledgment... He then told the Emperor, with much self-possession, that ifit were intended to give him the pousfa* to drink, he begged thathe might be immediately put to death, Aurangzib promised in a solemn manner, and in a loud voice, that this drink should most certainly not be administered.
* The pousia is a drink made of poppy-heads crushed-and soaked in water for a night. This was the potion generally given to princes confined in the forlress of Gwaliot, whose heads the Emperor was deterred by public shame from taking of. A large cup of this beverage was brought fo them early in the morning, and they were not given anything to eat until it was swallawed, This drink emaciated the wretched victims, who lost their strength and Intellect by slaw degrees, became jorpid and senseless, and at length died. .
wt The captive was sent to Gwalior and in that dismal state-prison Aurangzib in violation of his ‘solemn promise’ caused the death of the unhappy Sulaiman Shukoh (May 1662) by overdoses of opium.
§ 6. Sfuja’s first advance to contest the succession ; battle of Bafadutput.
Prince Muhammad Shuja, the second son of Shah Jahan and governor of Bengal, was a man of great intelligence, clegant iaste, and amiable disposition. But his constant devotion to pleasure, the easy administration of Bengal, and his 17 years’ residence in that enervating country, had made him weak, indolent and negligent, incapable of arduous toil, sustained effort, vigilant caution, or profound combination. [le had allowed his administration to dvift, his army to grow inefficient, and all his departments to fall into a slack and sleepy condition. His mental powers were as keen as before: but they required great emergencies to call them forth, and shone only by flashes; he was still capable of vigorous action, but only fitfully.
The story of Shah Jahan’s illness, with the usual exaggeration, reached Shuja at Rajmahal, then the capital of Bengal, and he immediately crowned himself Emperor with the title of Abul Fauz Nasir-ud-din Muhammad, Timur Ill, Alexander I, Shah Shuja Ghazi. «
Statting with alarge army, an excellent park of artillery, and the highly useful war-boats (nawwara) of Bengal, he reached Benares about 24th January, 1658, Meantime Dara had despatched against him an ax my of 22,000 men under his eldest son Sulaiman Shukoh, assisted by the able and experienced Mirza Rajah Jai Singh and Dilfir Khan Ruhela.
Early in the morning of 14th February, Sulaiman suddenly attacked = Shuja’s camp, _at Bahadurpur, 3 miles north-east of Benares. The surprise was so complete 1658} SHUJA’'S TWO ALTEMPTS TO REACH AGRA 8&7
that the sleeping Bengal soldiers and their leader had no time to put on their tunics, but fled away leaving everything behind. With great difficulty Shuja, mounted on an elephant, forced his way out of the ring of his enemies and found safety in his war-boats, whose gun-fire kept the enemy away from the bank. His entire camp and property, estimated at fifty lakhs of Rupees, were seized by the victors ; even the hamblest soldier had to abandon his all.
The panic-stricken army fled by the land roufe through Saseram to Patna, robbed by the villagers on ihe way. But hearing of the approach of the pursuing imperialists, Shuja fled to Mungir and blocked the road with his trenches and batteries. This brought Sulaiman sharply to a halt at Surajgarh, 15 miles south-west of Mungir, and he wasted precious months here without being able to advance. But the news of Dharmat forced him to make a hurried peace with Shuja, leaving Béngal Eastern Bihar and Orissa to that prince (7th May), and set out on his return to Agra.
' Aurangzib, after crowning himself at Delhi @1 July), wrote a friendly letter to Shuja, adding the enfire province of Bihar io his viceroyalty and promising him other favours.
"" ‘The news of Aurangzib’s absence in the far off Panjab at the heels of Dara revived Shuja’s ambition. Now was the time to conquer the undefended country up to Agra and release Shah Jahan. So, at the end of October, 1658, Shuja_ started from Patna with 25,000 cavalry and artillery and boats, and reached Khajwa, three days’ march beyond Allahabad on 30th December. Here be found Sultan Muhammad barring his path. In the meantime, Aurangzib after abandoning the pursuit of Dara at Multan (30th September), had hastened back to Delhi by forced marches (20th November), and strongly teinforced his army near Allahabad with men and money. Shuja’s open road to Agra was now blocked, and on 9nd January 1659 the Emperor himself joined his son near Kora, eight miles west of
Shuja’s position. Mir Juma, too, arrived there from the Deccan
on the same day.
$7. Khajwa: Jaswant’s treachery and firmness of Aurangsib.
On 4th January, Aurangzib marched his army in perfect order fill he arrived one mile in front of {he enemy’s carip, Here he halted, his soldiers maintained their exact positions, each man sleeping on the ground with his armour on and his saddied horse standing at his head. That night Mir Jumla, with a born general’s instinct, seized a mound midway between the two armies and by hard labour dragged 40 guns to it, which commanded the enemy’s camp. Careful vigil was kept by his officers throughout the night.
A few hours before the dawn of the 3th of January, the day fixed far the battle, a confused noise arose in the vanguard of Aurangzib’s army ; the alarm and disorder rapidly spread through the entire camp. The air was filled with the yells of the assailants, the cries of the fugitives, and the tramp of horsemen recklessly galloping away. The darkness heightened the confusion. The root of all this trouble was Maharajah Jaswant Singh, the commander of the imperial right wing, who had brooded over some fancied slight ar neglect and matured a deep plan of vengeance. He had, it was said, senta secret message fo Shuja saying that he would attack the imperial eamp behind the field at the close of the night, and that while the Emperor would hasten to the rear to tepel him Shuja should swiffly fall on the disordered army and crush it between two adversaries. So, shortly after midnight he got his 14,000 Rajputs ready, turned his back fo the field, rushed the camp of Prince Md, Sullan which lay in the path of his flight, and there carried off everything that the Rajputs could lay their hands on. Much of the Emperor's own camp suffered the same fate. The Rajputs took the road iss)

to Agra, but in the darkness and surprise the confusion spread to the army at the front 8
But the situation was saved by Aurangzib’s wonderful coolness and Shuja’s hesitation. Shuja received Jaswant's message, heard of the tumult, but did not leave his own camp at night, fearing it might be a mere ruse contrived between Aurangzib and Jaswant to lure him on to his destruction |
The Emperor was at his fafajfud prayer in his field-tent, when the news of Jaswant’s attack and desertion reached him. Without uttering a word, he merely waved his hand as if to say, “If he is gone, let him go! After deliberately finishing the prayer, he issued from the tent, mounted a fakfit-l-rawan (portable chair), and addressed his officers, “This incident is a metrey youchsafed to us by God. If the infidel had played the traitor in the midst of the battle, all would have been lost. His flight (now) is good for us.”
So Aurangeib firmly kept his own position, and prevented the confusion from spreading to his division. Orderlies were sent off to urge the leaders of the various corps not to stir from their own places, but to rally the fugitives. With the return of daylight many faithful officers who had been swept far away by the tide of flight hastened to rejoin the imperial banners, round which more than 50,000 soldiers were now assembled as against Shuja’s 23,000.
§ 8 Battle of Khajwa.
Shuja knew that he could not adopt the customary plan of battle, making his force correspond, division for division, to the enemy’s dispositions. [is small force would then have been overlapped and swallowed up by the vastly extended front of an enemy who outnumbered him as three fo one, So, with great judgment he made a new formation today: alt his army was drawn up in one long fine, behind the artillery. With true
generalship Shuja decided to assume the offensive, and make up for the smallness of his number by the moral superiority which the attacking party always has.
The battle began at 8 A.M. with a furious discharge of cannon, reckets and muskets; then the two vans closed together and plied their bows. Sayyid Alam, at the head of Shuja’s right wing, charged the imperial left wing, driving in front three infuriated elephants, each brandishing a two-maund iron chain in its trunk. Neither man nor beast could stand their impetuous onset. The imperial left, which had no prince or great general to command it, broke and fled. The panic spread even to the centre; the soldiers ran about in confusion. To make matters worse, a false report of fhe Emperor’s death suddenly spread through the ranks and many fled away. The enemy, after clearing the left wing, pushed on towards the centre, where only 2,000 troopers now remained to guard the Emperor. But his two reserves flung themselves forward and barred the enemy's path, The Emperor with the centre turned his elephant’s head to the left, in order to support that wing. Sayyid Alam was repelled and fled back by the same path that he had come.
But the three elephants continued to advance wildly, their wounds having made them fiercer than before. One of them came up to Aurangzib’s elephant. It was the critical moment of the battle. If the Emperor had siven ground or turned back, his whole army would have fled. But he stood fike a rock, chaining the legs of his elephant to prevent its flight. At his order one of his matchtockmen, Jalal Khan, shot down the mafut of the attacking elephant, a brave royal mafut oimbly leaped on is back and brought the riderless beast under his control. The Emperor now got breathing time, and turned fo succour his right, which had been hard-pressed by a charge of the enemy’s vanguard and left
wing under Prince Buland Akhtar. In spite of their smal{ number, their gallant charge dislodged their opponents ; many of the imperialists fled away. Freed from the danger on his left, Aurangzib now looked at his right and found there signs of confusion and flight But even in the greatest difficulty and danger, his coolness and presence of mind did not desert him. It at once struck him that, as his own front had hitherto been turned towards the left, if he were now to face suddenly round and march to the right, the rest of the army would interpret this volfe face as flight. So, he first sent orderlies ‘to the van to tell the generals of his real object and to urge them to fight on without fear.
Then he wheeled the centre round and joined his hardpressed right wing. The succour came not a minute too soon. This was the decisive move of the day. The tide of battle now rolled resistlessly against Shuja. The imperial right, newly strengthened, made a counter-charge and swept away the enemy from before them, with great carnage.
Meantine the imperial van, under Zulfigar Khan and Sulian Muhammad, had beaten back the attack on it, advanced, and shaken the enemy's front line. So thick was the shower of cannonballs, rockets and bullets from Aurangzib’s army that no man could stand it, There was now a general advance of the whole imperial army, tight, centre, and left. “Like masses of dark clouds, they ‘surrounded Shuja’s own division (the centre), his two flanks having been scattered already. The cannon-balls flew about his own head and killed many of his personal attendants.” Therefore, he left the dangerous prominence of the elephani’s back and took horse."
A 4 * (Bernier’s sfatement, copied by Stewart, that Shuja was on -the point al gaining the victory when he lost all by dismounting -ftom his elephant, merely gives the bazar gossip. ‘None of the contemporary authorities on whom my account of the battle is based, supports such an idea, which is also naturally improbable. Indeed, the battle had been already losl and Shuja was in imminent risk of being captured, when he tack horse.)
This was the end of the = struggle. All was now lost, as his soldiers believed that their master was dead. In a moment all that still remained of the Bengal army broke and fled. Shuja galloped away from the field with his sons, his general Sayyid Alam and a small body of troops. His entire camp and baggage were plundered by the imperialists. 114 pieces of cannon and 11 of the celebrated elephants of Bengal
beeame the victor’s prize.
89, The pursuit of Shuja and the war in Bifac.
In the afternoon following the victory of Khajwa, Autangzib sent a pursuing column under Muhammad Sultan after Shuja, Reinforcements under Mir Jumla soon raised this force to 30,000 men, Shuja fled through Benates and Patna to Mungir, where he made a _ fortnight’s stand, (49th Feb.—6th March). The city of Mungir stands in a narrow Plain, two and a half miles broad, between the Ganges river and the Khargpur hills, Along this plain runs the most convenient road trom Patna to Bengal. Shuja had blocked the road by means of a wall and a ditch running from the river to the hill, with raised bastions at every thirty yards’ distance, defended with large guns landed from his boats and manned by his soldiers.
Early in March Mir Jumla arrived before Mungir, and finding the main road barred, bribed Rajah Bahroz of Khargpur and under his guidance carried the imperial army through the hills and jungles south-east of Mungir fort, thus turning Shuja’s rear. Thal prince now fled from Mungir (6th March) to Sahibganj, where he blocked the natrow pass with a wall (J0th--24th March). But the impetialists won over Khwajah Kamal Afghan, the zamindar of Birbhum and Chatnagar, and with his help and guidance made a detour 1659} MIR JUMLA VERSUS SHUIA re)
tl
round the south-east of the Mungir district and reached Suri on the 28th.
But a false rumour that Dara had triumphed near Ajmir and was wreaking vengeance on the Rajput States now induced the Rajput contingent under Mir Jumla (especialiy the troops of Ram Singh, the eldest son of Jai Singh) to desert and push on to their distant homes. Thus the pursuing force lost 4,000 men (30th March), but was still] twice as strong as Shuja’s army.
In the meantime, Shuja had evacuated Sahibganj (97th March) for Rajmahal ; but finding even Rajmahal unsafe, he retreated (4th April) to the Malda district. His chief noble Alawardi Khan, who had planned to desert to Mir Jumla with many other officers, was beheaded (2nd April), an the detection of his plot. The imperialists occupied Rajmahal on 13th April, and thus the whole country west of the Ganges passed out of Shuja's hands.
The war that now ensued between the two sides was a curious contest like that between a tiger and a cracodile, Shuja’s regular troops had by now been reduced to five thousand men, while Mir Jumla’s army was five times as large and, man for man, superior in fighting capacity. Shuja was, therefore, hopelessly inferior on land. But Mir fumla’s army was a purely land force. He had not, at first, a single boat of his own for campaigning in this land of waler-ways, and his guns were fewer and smaller than his enemy's. On the other hand, Shuja bad an artillery of big pieces admirably served by European and half-brced gunners. He had the entire flotilla (nawwara) of Bengal at his disposal for crossing rivers, transporting his troops, or cannonading the imperial defences and camp on the river-bank wherever he liked. This arm gave Shuja wonderful mobility and multiplied the effective strength of his small army, while the lack of boats paralysed Mir Jumla’s efforts and neutralized his superiority on land,

Shuja, making Tanda (four miles west of the fort of Gaur) his base, entrenched various places on the eastern bank of the Ganges to prevent Mir Jumla from crossing over. But his plans were foiled by Mir Jumla’s wonderful activity in procuring boats from remote places and Aurangzib'’s clever  strategical move in sending another army, under the governor of Patna, to make a diversion on the left bank of the Ganges and turn Shuja’s right flank.
From his headquarters at Dogachi, thirteen miles south of Rajmahal, Mir Jumla struck two successful blows at Shuja. [le wrested from the enemy, by a night surprise, an island in midstream, opposite Dogachi, where a detachment of Shuja’s men was posted, and he held it against repeated atiempts to recover it, Later, the imperialists surprised ancl destroyed a battery of eight guns which the enemy had erected on the eastern bank facing Sui.
The imperial army was distributed along the enlire western bank: Muhammad Murad Beg was left in command at Rajmahal in the extreme north ; the prince with Zulfiqar Khan, Islam Khan, and the bulk of the army, remained at Dogachi 13 miles southwards, facing Shujas At Dunapur, some 8 miles further south, Ali Quli Khan was posted, while Mir Jumia himself with six or seven thousand troops occupied Suli, the southernmost point of the Mughal fines, 28 miles south of Rajmahal.
But a third coup planned by Mir Jumla failed with heavy loss, because this time Shuja was on the alert and had prepared an ambush. On 3rd May 1659, when only the first part of the expedition sent by the Mughal general had landed, the men and their boats were attacked by a superior enemy force which had been waiting for them in hiding. The imperial detachment sacrificed in this vain attempt four high officers and many hundred soldiers, besides 500 left as prisoners, No  succour could be sent by Mir Jumla from the western bank, as his boats were afraid to face the Bengal flotilla,
Late in the night of Sth June, DPrinee Muhammad Sultan fled from his post at Dogachi fo Shuja. He had lone been chafing under the tutelage of Mir Jumia, and aspired to reign independently ! Shuja secretly offered him the hand of his daughter Gulrukh Banu, and his help in gaining the throne, and thus won the thoughtless prince over. On hearing the news, Mir Jumla at Suti firmly kept his own men quiet, and the morning after the flight code to the prince’s camp at Dogachi, harangued the leaderless troops, put heart and hope into them, and restored order and discipline. A council of war was held; all the other generals agreed to obey him as their sole head. Thus the army weathered the storm; “it Jost only one man—the prince.”
Soon afterwards, the torrential rains of Bengal suspended military operations. Mir Jumla, with about 15,000 men, took post at Masuma-bazar, while the rest of the tnperial army, under Zulfiqar Khan, stayed at Rajmahal, the two divisions being separated by 60 miles of road impassable in that season,
The rains converted the neighbourhood of Rajmahal into one marshy lake. The citys food supply from the Majwa hills (in the north-west) was cut off by reason of Shuja bribing its Rajah ; the waler-route was commanded by Shuja’s flotilla; and so scarcity of grain reached its extreme among the Mughal garrison fin Rajmahal. In this situation, Shuja made a sudden attack with his flotilla and captured the cily on 22nd Augusl, with all the property of the Mughals.
§ 10. The war in Bengal.
At the beginning of December [659 Shuja marched from Rajmahal with 8,000 men, against Mir Jumla who was encamped near Belghata, (42 miles southwards, and opposite Jangipur in the Murshidabad district). Here he twice attacked the imperialists and did them such damage, on account of
their marked inferiority in artillery, that Mir Jumla fell back on Murshidabad, while Shuja marched paralicl to him to Nashipur. But in the meantime, Daud Khan the governor of Bihar, with a second army had forced a passage across the Kushi river, swept away the Shujaite forces on the north bank of the Ganges and was in full march on ‘Tanda, On hearing _ this mews Shuja left Nashipur (26 Dec.) and hastened towards Tanda via Sui. Mir Jumla immediately gave him chase, Shuja erossed the Ganges at Rajmahal and the imperialists recovered that city on 11th January 1660. Thus, the whole country west of the Ganges was finally lost to Shuja.
This year Mir Jumla’s plan of campaign was brilliantly novel: he would attack the enemy from an unexpected quarter, the north-east. Shuja’s position now was a long line, stretching northwest fo south-east from  Samda_ island (opposite Rajmahal) to Tanda, with his headquarters about the middle of the line at Chauki Mirdadpur. Mir Jumla’s plan was to make a wide detour in a semi-circle north of this position, by way of Rajmahal, Akbarpur and Malda, then turn sharply south and swoop down upon Tanda from the east. With the help of the 160 boats brought from Patna, he earried his army over the Ganges, [0 miles north of Rajmahal, and joined Daud Khan.
Shuja was hopelessly outnumbered from the first, and now (February 1660) found his only fine of retreat, in the south, threatened. At this time, Princeg, Muhammad Sultan deserted him and sneaked back to the Mughal camp at Dogachi (sth Feb).. He was doomed to pass the rest of his life in prison.
On 6th March Mir Jumla reached Malda and worked hard for a month to complete his preparations for his crowning ‘stroke which would crush Shuja in one move, From his headquarters at Mahmudabad (a few miles below Maida town), he started on Sth April, and after a march of 10 miles surprised the small enemy patrol at an obscure ford of the 1660} SHUIA’S FLIGHT, FROM TANDA O7
Mahananda river. Without a moment’s delay, the imperialists plunged into the waiter; all order was gone and in the confusion the: shallow ford was missed; vast numbers went below their depth on both sides of the track, and more than a thousand soldiers were drowned, including a son of Dilir Khan.
But it was the decisive move of the campaign. All was now over with Shuja. Ile must immediately flee to Dacca, before the enemy’s net could completely close round him. He hastened to Tanda at dawn of 6th April and ordered his Begams to come away at once “without waiting even to change their dress.” His treasure and a selection from his other property were loaded in four large boats and sent down the stream. In the afternoon he himself embarked. His two younger sons, (Buland Akhtar and Zain-wl-abidin), his chiefs, Mirza Jan Beg, Sayyid Alam of Barha, Sayyid Quli Uzbak, and Mirza Beg, a few soldiers, servants, and euntichs,---300 men in all,-accompanied him in 60 boats (fosas). This was the sole remnant of the splendid Court amidst which he had ruled three provinces, and the vast army with which he had twice contested the throne of Delhi !
Wild terror and confusion now reigned in his camp at Tanda. His unguarded property was plundered. Next day (7th April) Mir Jumla occupied the city and restored order. He seized for the Government all the property he found or could recover from the plunderers; the women left behind by Shuja were properly guarded and taken care of. At Tartipur 400 loaded boats of Shuja’s flotilla were seized, besides the two treasure-laden gfurabs. His army now came over to Mir Jumla (9th April). Then the general set off from Tanda (19th April) for Dacca.
§ 11. Sfuja abandons Bengal; fis end.
Ch 12th April, Shuja reached Dacca, the second capital of Bengal, a bankrupt in fame and fortune. But it was to be no

asylum to him. The samindars were all up against him and he was too weak either to subdue them or to face Mir Jumla who was hastening behind him. So, on 6th May’ he left Dacca and glided down the river towards the sea. At every silage soldiers and boatmen deserted him in large numbers. He had already begged help from the king of Arracan, and two days after leaving Dacca he was met by 31 ships sent by that Ring’s governor of Chatgaon. All hope of maintaining a hold on Bengal was given up and he steeled his heart to banish himself to the land of the savage Maghs,
The news spread consternation among his family and followers. The piracy of the Arracanese of Chatgaon in the rivers of East Bengal had made them too well known to the people. Whole districts in Noakhali and Baqarganj had been depopulated through their ravages. Their daring attacks, ferocious cruelty, uncouth appearance, barbarous manners, lack of religion and caste, and practice of eating unclean animals,— all caused them to be regarded by the people of East Bengal, Hindus and Muslims alike, with a mixture of terror and loathing.
But there was no help for il, if Shuja wanted to avoid the fate of Dara Shukoh and Murad Balthsh at the hands of Aurangzib. So, on [9th May 1660, he finally left the home of his ancestors and the province which he had ruled for twenty years, and sailed for Arracan with his family and less than forty followers; ten of these were Sayyids of Barha, famous throughout India for their valour and devotion to their master, . ;
Shuja was not happy in his new home. His unquiet ambition brought down a iragic end upon him. “Many dwellers in Arracan, Mughal and Pathan,...showed themselves inclined towards him. He planned an outbreak intending to slay the Ring and take his kingdom, and then advance once more to fest his fortune in Bengal.” ( The king of Arracan heard of
the plot and “planned the assassination of Shah Shuja. Shah Shuja with a few men fled into the jungle. The Maghs...pursued the poor prince,..cutting his body into pieces.” (Dutch report,
Feb. 1661). )